How to Be Rich
---------------

**AUTHOR:**  J. Paul Getty
**DATE READ:** 2013-04-26

%%inc/addthis.html%%

### NOTES ###

From the legend himself.. Basically very unique thing. I really wanted to
get a book from first person perspective. Previous content I consumed was
generated by human being of moderate wealth. People, who went on their way
of setting up companies, building products and successfully selling them.

Nobody as far as I know got really wealthy. Well, maybe Larry Ellison and
Jim Clarke did, but others didn't.

Funny thing is that most of people who wrote motivational books on obtaining
money and wealth never really had true riches under their control. I don't
think Napoleon Hill was really a wealthy man. We could consider him
exceptionally wealthy based on number of other guys who he motivated, but
that doesn't count.

Anyway

Getty's book is exceptionally unique. How can't you call unique a book which
starts with "How I made my first billion". Jonas Howard got close to the 1st
impression in his "On the Roll", when he started from "The day ...... I was
worth $100M" (after IDT IPO offering).

Impression I got from Getty's book is that the author seemed extremely
humble man and the advices seem be addressed to people of all ages and
experience levels.

There's a small cheat at the beginning when he mentions father didn't help
him with anything, however their first investments they did together. Hmm..


The chapter on appreciation of art is very good too. Couldn't even believe
it has been addressed in the book.


@@@RIGHT@@@

<iframe src="http://rcm.amazon.com/e/cm?lt1=_blank&bc1=FFFFFF&IS2=1&npa=1&bg1=FFFFFF&fc1=000000&lc1=FF0000&t=wojcadamkoszh-20&o=1&p=8&l=as4&m=amazon&f=ifr&ref=ss_til&asins=0515087378" style="width:120px;height:240px;" scrolling="no" marginwidth="0" marginheight="0" frameborder="0"></iframe>
