---
title: "Meet Jeff, the true professional software engineer"
author: "Wojciech Adam Koszek"
description: >
  In this article Jeff tells us how professional software engineer like
  himself thinks of solving problems with software.

maillist: >
  A note from Jeff, after 20 years in the software engineer industry
address: "Menlo Park, CA"
tags:
- "software engineering"
- "open source"
published: true
image: https://www.koszek.com/img/2017-03-28-are-you-a-good-open-source-contributor/volkan-olmez-101863_15p.jpg
ads:
-
spellcheck-allow:
-
---

Meet Jeff, the only professional software engineer out there.


Everyone, meet Jeff. Jeff is the the only professional software engineer out
there. Jeff will tells us something from his 20 years of experience in the
software industry.

## Jeff

Hi guys. Heh. Thanks. Well, I don't know where to start. Noone has ever
asked me this. I guess you and I differ, since you've not yet figured out what software business is
all about.
I wrote so many lines of code running in production out there ...
I mean..
Writing working stuff isn't fun anymore. I'm done with that. I like cars
now. I repair engines in my free time now.

But anyway..

So you ask me how I got here. I don't know, man. I guess I think ... it was
a matter of my ethic. You know -- just come to the office, do my job on time
and leave. Pretty much it was to pay bills, and I hoped it'd get better, but
... Well. It's not bad. Others have worse.

So first I'd say: I just came to the office and solved all the issues and that's all.
It's been 20 years now. My God.

## Do stuff on time

When I first started here I was pretty new. You know, I moved over here from
Kansas, and people around here seamed wiser, so I just stuck my nose in the
keyboard and did my tasks. Whatever people assigned me, I just did it. And
you know -- not much innovative stuff. Sometimes fun, sometimes drugery:
computer problems, plumbing, making sure tests pass. Write new line of code
was a holiday. Delivering tables and
spreadsheets for management, mostly. I didn't really control what they
waned me to do. It was years after I could put some of my stuff in.

But I figured it all pretty quickly. You see, my previous job was in small cafe
house. The type that students go to. And software business and this coffee
house are similar. People come, want to get their stuff served quickly and
nicely, without unnecessary hassle.  Here's it's the same. They tell you
what they want and if you give it to them, they say thank you. Just the tips
are batched together, so if you're good, you'll get a bonus.

I was late, couple of times. People hated that. I figured that even if I
don't piss people off and do what they say, if I'm late, they'll get mad.
There was this one time.... Eh. This story is a little long. But yeah, if
you can fullfill the orders on time and within budget. That's the top thing.

There were two interns here, from good school. I though they would get hired
and I'd be out, since I figured they could pay them less. But after they
went back to school I heard they didn't really want to hire them. Apparently
guys were smart, but were always late with stuff. They always wanted to move
stuff around, try to do better, faster. And you know how it is, typically --
you think you can do better, you try, and it's a failure. So I just made
sure I was different than these guys.

Let me see.. What else got me here.

## Improving process

So I guess after some time of this cycle of, you know, get task, do task,
get task, do task, I started to figure things out.

I knew who needs what, and I also figured what it's all about. I figured
these patterns that show up here and there. Like Mike would want his reports
in XML and Jen wanted me to show her logs. Always. And at the beginning I
did it all like a monkey, kind of. All by hand.

Then when I figured it all out, it was automated. I basically wrote the
scripts to do work for me, so when they came, I had my stuff already figured
out. I'd just show them stuff. And I figured that if I put it in the
intranet, they'll be able to see that too. One day I tried that and it
worked. They stopped coming. I didn't really mind, since in this coffee shop
I told you about a had a rough boss, the Texan guy, who watched my hands
pretty closely. But after he figured I just want to earn a dime for college,
he left me alone. He started trusting me. Here it's the same.

The more time I spent here, I just kept adding on top of my existing toolbox
and making sure people get from me what they want. Sometimes, I figured,
they'd also let me put a little thing, a little addition or suggestions that
I had.

"Good job Jeff" was when I started to send out a status of our unit test
suite. It was a total crap, and people kept ignoring it, but I guess when
they saw failing tests outputs in their mailbox, they started to core. You
know, they probably didn't even bother looking at this, if the suite kept
failing for like a month or two. So this e-mail gave them something to be
ashamed of, I guess. And they fixed it.

So yeah, it was work and basically gradually proposing stuff to other people
and giving them some of my tools.

Let's see.

## Being a nice person

This Michael was here before me. Brilliant guy. After 20 years I'm still
reading his code. No tests, no nothing. But everything works. Just really
bright guy. But I heard he was an asshole. Like a moronic type, that people
hate him. Didn't talk, didn't do much. Just sat here, and wrote code. People
were surprised, since they felt he was slacking off, showing up here at 10am
while most of others are here by 8:30am. You know.

They couldn't really fire him for a long time, and he was making good
progress. We attribute a lot of stuff to him. The multi request thing I
showed you earlier - he did it.

But he was rude, people got tired and kicked him out. First downsizing and
he was out, and afterwards, when the market bounced back, they knew they
needed a replacement and Rich, a buddy of mine, recommended me. I was
finishing college, needed a job. I wanted to work for Xerox since all good
people were there, but you know. Things turned out differently, and I met my
wife around that time, so steady paycheck was nice. I came here and I just
stayed.

What else..

## I used existing code

The thing that probably will be new to you is my approach to code.
You know, when I was young, I just wanted to write code. And debug.
The feeling it all came from my head to the screen and worked was great.

Not me. I'm tired. If I could, I'd retire. Or just hang out with my wife.
She's cute, but I'll tell you this some other time.

Anyway..

But then after I started to get better at this, and read articles and
books.. I guess I saw the algorithms and solutions and I knew I'll waste
massive slice of time redoing it. I tried that maybe three times, and
whatever I bleeded out on the keyboard was mediocre. So I've just given up
on this. And I kinda understood all of this what I read. So re-doing it
seemed like I wasn't really proving anything.

Right now I just look for the best guy out there, try to see if he wrote
stuff, and steal his shit. Whenever I can I just take and bring huge chunks
of code that I know work. I'll put a little note here and there where I took
it from, but nobody ever question that. I think people don't read this code,
heh.

So you know -- maybe you too like shuffling lines of text all day long. But 
I figured it's easier to be on time with other people's code.
And now I just use this approach.
Maybe you just like sitting in front of the computer and still debugging,
but it's not for me anymore. I just do it only when I really can, since I
figured other stuff will demand my time anyway.

I guess that ties it to another thing..

## Reducing risk

I told you that I can't retire, so I hope to make the time in front of the computer
suck a little bit less. After 20 years your eyes hurt, your back hurts, so
you just want to spend less time in front of this S.O.B.

And I hate solving issues in production code, and looking like a dumb when
my asserts fail. This I really hate. You go to a meeting to explain the
failure that happened over night, and you have Dave there, the IT guy, and
his boys were woken up by pagers and they moaned to him probably, and he is
pissed. So going there and explain the IT guy why your code failed. Eh.

Now I try to reduce risk. So as I told you, I'll just use whatever other
guys are using, unless we really need a custom piece. But mostly we don't.
We have ... what. Two millions of accounts now, and we haven't written
anything from scratch, really. It's all Open Source now.

So most of the time my process is: find how other guys did it, and we'll do
the same. This works well, since basically you work smart: other guys
debugged this crap for you, and you're just plugging it in.

And the thing I like is to just use my toolbox. The new stuff I don't
understand. You know -- it's people like you who are young and ambitous.
They go, read the code and say: "Ha, I can do better than that". And then
they make and use their own stuff and keep maintaining it. I guess that
works if you have a lot of time, but now with wife and kids. You know, I
really want to get done with this and go home.

Let me tell you: my stuff works. I may sound like an asshole, but think
of it as owning a Jeep. It's 20 year old car, and has sits ripped off,
messed up dashboard and inside stinks with your dog. But it works. And
if you want to take it for a trip, it works. And for the cinema, it works
too. It's not flashy and you won't pick girls with it, but it's not what
I use it for. I just use it to get my job.

These intern I have in my group. Man. They each use different programming
language. They all keep arguing now, in the office, in lunch. They wrote
some code for a class; different universities and different cities, but they
had these assignments. They keep arguing, but I saw this and it's all
similar.

They didn't teach them much there, so they run the code in debugging mode,
on their laptops. It's not tested, and not deployed anywhere. I asked each
one of them during one-on-ones to show me this stuff, and it took them like
10 minutes to just get the damn thing started.

With my code I just go from 0 to production deploy in 10 minutes. I just,
you know, use whatever there is. Take my existing stuff from my previous
project, paste it in the new project and `scp` the source code files and 
I can make a fairly scalable website in a two or three days. Maybe not
something which would hold million accounts, but 10,000 easily. I know, I
once measured that.

Anyway..

## Buy, whenever possible

What I started to like is when they asked me to opimize my work once. First
time they did that, I had no idea what's going on. I went back to my cube
and started to look at code. Then on the next meeting when they asked about
estimates I kinda understood I failed.

My then-boss took me on a side after that meeting and he told me:

"Jeff, we pay you 30 bucks an hour here. And it's hard to, you know...
It's basically whatever you do with this time, we'll have to pay you
anyway. We could have you do all sorts of nasty necessities here,
and maybe get some new guy in, but why?"

"Listen Jeff, I'm much rather give you some lump sum for whatever you want
if you can free up some time, so that I don't need to take anyone new here."

"Jeff, listen, don't tell anyone, but the number of e-mails I get... I
remove half of it. So try to make it so that we can stay small. Go and see
what can we automate"

So I got it pretty quickly. I looked at my console logs -- you know -- I
keep what I often type to console handy. And I figured that spinning the
staging environment was a total fiasco always. Three commands run in
different windows, to different appliances. So I told him this.

Next month they sent me to Atlanta to talk to the vendor. They showed me
their solution. You had to customize it, and I didn't know crap about it.
It failed three times. But once the guy made it work, it was a single
command.

I called my boss and told him it was a good stuff, and before I came back to
the office next Monday I had their product receipts on my desk. Same guy
came to the office next Thursday (we were lucky, since they were giving a
demo to some big government company in the city) and he customized it. We
paid him like 70 bucks or something. And it was all working.

So I quickly understood that if I can pay some money and get all
up-and-running solution, it's good stuff. And then we went ahead, and
revamped a lot of our stuff. Now reporting, analytics, virtualization. It's
all boxed ready-to-use stuff. Saves us time.

What else..

# Don't rewrite

One thing I haven't tried here is rewriting code in here.
They prohibited me.
After I pulled some old code from the repository I think I got it.
I read some articles on rewriting code and it was all failure stories. You
know, standard thing: one guys wrote and debugged the code, another came and
added on top of it. Then it repeated two times. And the code is there, maybe
ugly, but working.

If you try to touch it, you break 2-3 things each it. So complete rewrite is
like 200-300 things broken, and you go through the same issues all the time.

So we never tried that here. My team now sometimes comes and shows me crap
we have. I give the "How to deal with legacy code", and then when they come
back with several tests for each ugly feature, then I can give them a green
light for refactoring. But we never rewrite. I told them their ass is grass
and I'm a lawnmower when they decide to rewrite anything.

So some people left over the years, because you know, they tried to show
off. They wanted to try themselves out in the field. I understand this, but
I now have people here and we really want to keep it going smoothly. So it's
fine -- we're here maintaining the thing and it sort of works fine.

Hm..

## Update only when necessary

Updates are painful here. We have many systems here, and me and my guys have
to keep it going, which unfortunately includes security. I hoped IT would
deal with it more, but we're hands on all the time too.

So when there's a report on issues it's a pain. We patch the system and it
works 90% of time, but this remaining 10% is like hours of hours of work for
everybody.

We really hate updating, because you have to go and check if nothing
changed. And you know--we have tests, but they sometimes don't capture
stuff. We tests a lot of stuff on the request level, but if background tasks
don't come up after update, there's not much to test.

So we only do updates when it's justified. We just turned every feature we
didn't use, and keep going through documentation to be able to turn off more
stuff. We just run with minimal settings for all the software we use it
here. I'm no expert here, IT guys are better. But I look at it that way: if
something has a management interface or some fancy feature, I want it out.

And we plan updates, since many times everything just breaks and it takes
time to fix. And downtime is money lost, so... Young guys like you all here
want to always run with everything up-to-date, but I'm fine with version
O.O.7 instead of O.O.11. If it works, it works, and I don't want to mess
with it for no reason.

Man. It's been a while here. I don't know what else... Maybe ...

## Remove code

The thing that helps us all is that we pretty much don't have feeling
involved in the job.
You know, these guys have been with me for more than ten years now.
Mark is here like twelve years now. We met when he was a bachelor, and
now, you know. He's a grown up guy.

So we don't feel very strong about our stuff here. If something has to go,
it goes away and there's not much of a discussion here. We rip things appart
sometimes and, yeah, I spent hours on writing some of these tests, scripts,
infrastructure. But other people do it better and refactored stuff, so my
stuff isn't necessary. So to some extent it's like a celebration for me. My
guys come and say: "You wrote X and it worked for 5 years now, but we're
making this change for a customer and it makes our life difficult". And I
like that. After they leave I go to pick up tea, and just come back here,
roll my eyes and eyeball the code. Sometimes I still remember writing it,
and I get a lot of it. But I don't care -- I just go and can remove as much
as I can. And they clean up the rest.

Same with their code. Sometimes they are invested in the code, since they've
spent weeks writing and testing our crap. But I tell them line removed is a
line which doens't need maintenance. We removed more code than we added,
according to repository line statistics.

Hm. Now it kind of reminds me one thing

## Test

You guys mostly write code. I guess it comes with school--they teach you to
program and new programming languages, but little testing.
In production it's different. You test the hell out of it, since bugs are so
expensive.

If you wire 5 people in here for three days, then this debugging is like a
million dollars. Or more.

So we test 50% of time or more. We do staging environments, our development
environment mimics production. All the aspect of it are the same. And then
we run unit tests, functional tests, load tests. Everything is automated by
now, and we really cherish that.

When a new member or an intern comes, they like it too. This may be the best
part we give to them: they see how we have it here and they repeat it on
their end. So I guess we're like a samaritan who gives gifts. Haha!

We don't look at the commits with no tests. If I see some new function is
added, I want it tested right away, so that there are no surprises. And the
guys know it by now. They sometimes close their pull requests because they
know I won't read the code without tests. Tests and documentation.

## Rest.

**No feelings** There's an idea that you must be passionate. And you must be
enthusiastic. I don't see this in true professional engineers. They have
their hobby, their family. This is where their passion is. If you want to
see excited professional, ask him about his wife, not his code. There are no
feelings in

**Little conflict** Two kittens . Alpha lion lies and looks. He doesn't
We will do A and B. And it's how it's going to be.

**Kills his own code** No feeling attached. It's just business. I wrote you, but
I don't need you anymore. We've been friends for a while, but do understand: 

**Does't feel burning excitement
